--- PAGE 71 ---
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations.
Practice Point 1.2.3.3: Laboratories measuring creatinine in
infants or small children must ensure their quality control
process include the lowest end of the expected range of
values for the group of interest.
Practice Point 1.2.3.4: Consider the consistent use of
enzymatic creatinine assays in children, given the higher
relative contribution of non-creatinine chromogens to
measured creatinine in children when using the Jaffe assay,
and the high prevalence of icteric and hemolyzed samples
in the neonatal period.
Practice Point 1.2.3.5: An eGFRcr level <90 ml/min per
1.73 m
2 can be ﬂagged as “low” in children and adolescents
over the age of 2 years.
In the KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease, 1 a
cutoff of 60 ml/min per 1.73 m 2 was chosen to de ﬁne “low”
GFR for children. In this update, we advise increasing the
cutoff to 90 ml/min per 1.73 m 2 for children and adolescents.
In children and adolescents, a reduced GFR is likely to
deteriorate further and, therefore, warrants closer monitoring
and early intervention. Children with lower-than-normal GFR
often experience deterioration in GFR during periods of rapid
growth in adolescence.
224 Those with subnormal GFR during
adolescence are more likely to eventually experience clinically
important low GFR later in life. Even mild decreases in
eGFR (i.e., CKD G2) are associated with poor kidney
outcomes. In a US study of over 7 million children captured
by electronic health record data, 8600 had CKD G2. At 10
years from cohort entry, the rate of reaching kidney failure
or a 50% decline in eGFR ranged from around 10%
(nonglomerular CKD) to around 40% (glomerular CKD).
225
Furthermore, eGFR between 60 and 90 ml/min per 1.73 m 2
is sometimes associated with impaired linear growth and
with hyperparathyroidism in children and adolescents.
226,227
A higher cutoff de ﬁning low GFR for children and ado-
lescents also re ﬂects their longer life expectancy. Early inter-
vention may have profound protection of GFR. CKD G2 has
long been considered to re ﬂect decreased GFR in children,
reﬂected by the inclusion of children and adolescents with
CKD G2 in pediatric CKD trials and cohort studies, including
Effect of Strict Blood Pressure Control and ACE Inhibition on
the Progression of CRF in Pediatric Patients (ESCAPE),
228
Hypertension Optimal Treatment in Children with Chronic
Kidney Disease (HOT-KIDS; United Kingdom), 229 CKiD
(North America), 230 KoreaN cohort study for outcomes in
people with pediatric CKD (KNOW-PedCKD; South
Korea),231 and the Kids with CKD (KCAD; Australia and
New Zealand). 232 The de ﬁnition of CKD remains
unchanged; the ﬂagging of GFR <90 ml/min per 1.73 m 2 as
low for children and adolescents re ﬂects the need for closer
assessment for evidence of kidney damage and monitoring.
1.2.4 Selection of GFR estimating equations
Recommendation 1.2.4.1: We recommend using a
validated GFR estimating equation to derive GFR
from serum ﬁltration markers (eGFR) rather than
relying on the serum ﬁltration markers alone (1D).
Practice Point 1.2.4.1: Use the same equation within
geographical regions (as de ﬁned locally [e.g., continent,
country, and region] and as large as possible). Within such
regions, equations may differ for adults and children.
The recommendation places a high value on the use of an
estimating equation for GFR that has been validated in the
population of interest and which has been shown to be most
accurate in comparison with mGFR and a low value on the
comparison of performance characteristics across different
equations. The key points are to use an equation validated in
and most suited to the population of interest.
Key information
Balance of bene ﬁts and harms. This recommendation rec-
ognizes that there are now a number of validated GFR esti-
mating equations available. They have differing performance
characteristics, which may differ depending on the population
of interest. The intention of suggesting the use of the same
equation within a region is to reduce clinical confusion if
people with CKD go to different laboratories within a region
and to enable appropriate population comparisons. Use of
different equations (and thus different eGFR values for the
same person) may lead to confusion for both the individual
person and their healthcare providers.
The W ork Group judged that there is potential for harm if
people get different eGFR values when receiving care in
different settings. As described in Section 1.2.2,t h e r ea r e
several sources of variability in eGFR. Differences between
valid equations are often substantially less than these sources
of variability, but that might not be understood by most
healthcare providers or people, leading to excessive anxiety
and repeated testing for small changes in GFR as related to
the use of a different GFR estimating equation. Using the
same equation within the same geographical region can
eliminate the source of variation that is related to the speci ﬁc
parameters of the GFR estimating equation.
There is bene ﬁt to clinical care, research, and public health
with the use of validated equations such that decisions,
research ﬁndings, and public policy are informed by accurate
estimates of CKD.
Certainty of evidence. This recommendation is based on
W ork Group consensus regarding good clinical practice to use
a GFR estimating equation validated in the population of
interest. Table 13 lists criteria for validated equations.
The criteria were developed by accumulated evidence from
assessment of the performance of eGFR versus mGFR across
equations and populations. For example, use of equations
developed using assays that are not traceable to reference
chapter 1 www.kidney-international.org
S186 Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 4S), S117–S314
--- PAGE 72 ---
materials cannot be applied to settings with differences in
assays,233 or use of equations developed in one population
may not perform well in other populations with very
different characteristics.
153,234,235
Values and preferences. There are now several valid equa-
tions that can be reasonably used in local settings. The W ork
Group recognizes that different values and preferences may
lead to different decisions in selection among validated GFR
estimating equations. Thus, instead of being prescriptive, we
list a set of criteria that de ﬁnes a valid equation, a set of
equations considered valid at this time, and a list of metrics to
deﬁne better versus worse performance as evaluated in the
local area. It is of value that GFR thresholds for de ﬁnition and
staging be standardized using valid equations optimized for a
speciﬁc region helps to ensure this occurs. Where possible,
inclusion of representation from key constituents in the
population in the development of the equation and ensuring
that it remains valid in those populations is also of value.
Using validated eGFR equations improves the accuracy of
assessment of true GFR but remains imperfect, and no single
equation performs consistently across all populations. The W ork
Group judged that people with CKD and their healthcare pro-
viders would want GFR estimated using the equation providing
the greatest accuracy in the population of their geographical
region. The W ork Group recognizes that across the world there is
signiﬁcant variation in the sociodemographic and ethnic
makeup of populations and that even well-validated equations
developed in different populations may not perform as well as
others developed and validated in the population of interest.
Resource use and costs. There are a number of initial costs
including human resource costs associated with taking the time
to decide on which equation, then time and technical infor-
mation resources to be considered to change the computation,
and the laboratory and nephrology teams to test the new
equation and inform the clinical partners on the change. In
addition, education for primary care providers, people with
CKD, and other healthcare providers is also required, which
incurs both direct and indirect costs. There will be costs, both
human resource and meetings costs, associated with decision-
making around which equation to use. Additional costs will be
accrued if validation and impact studies are required.
Considerations for implementation. Each region should have
a mechanism for review and selection of equations for
implementation by laboratories. For most countries, this
might be through the national kidney society working in
collaboration with laboratory physician organizations or
regional laboratory groups, as has occurred in the United
States and Europe, respectively.
236,237 Decisions at this level by
continental or national organizations are likely to minimize
the likelihood that decisions for equation use will be made
within small geographical areas or governed by local
decisions, leading to greater variation in eGFR and
uncertainty by people with CKD and healthcare providers.
Considerations in decisions about implementation will
reﬂect the balance of the criteria listed in Table 13.
There are likely to be tradeoffs between optimal accuracy
in local regions versus uniformity. Equations optimized for a
speciﬁc region can help to ensure that the GFR thresholds for
disease de ﬁnition, classi ﬁcation, and risk estimation have the
same implications across regions. However, it would lead to
barriers to implementation, as it will not be possible for all
regions to conduct a suf ﬁciently large and representative
study to evaluate these equations and develop modi ﬁcations.
If not possible, or in the interim, we advise using equations
that were developed in populations most similar to the
available populations. For example, until more accurate re-
gion-speciﬁc equations are available in countries within
Central or South America, it may be reasonable to use CKD-
EPI given the inclusion of Black and Hispanic participants in
the development of equation, and within African countries, to
use the EKFC equations using the Q-values, the median SCr
concentration in a cohort developed in 2 African countries.
234
Table 13 | Criteria for a validated GFR estimating equation
Criteria Consideration
Developed using rigorous measured GFR (mGFR) methods; ideally using comparable measurements for
all individuals in the development populations
Development methods
Developed using assays for ﬁltration markers traceable to reference materials with acceptable accuracy
and imprecision
Development methods
Developed with suf ﬁcient sample size for the population Development population
Study populations with a wide range of clinical characteristics and GFR, where possible representative
of the clinical populations in which equations are to be applied, including representative samples
of general population and people with kidney disease
Development population
Performance vs. mGFR evaluated in separate populations from that in which it was developed
(i.e., external validation, not random split of development data)
Accuracy
Performance shows certain thresholds for performance compared with other equations (see Table 15 ) Accuracy
Can be reported by laboratories (i.e., no other variables required for computation that are
not readily available)
Implementation by clinical laboratories
GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate.
www.kidney-international.org chapter 1
Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 4S), S117–S314 S187
--- PAGE 73 ---
However, other considerations may also be relevant for the
regional organization making these decisions. We also note
that if cystatin C is available, then using eGFRcr-cys would
simplify the selection of the equation as the performance of
eGFRcr-cys computed from the different equations is more
similar than that of eGFRcr.
Rationale
The KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evalu-
ation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease recom-
mended “to report eGFRcr in adults using the 2009 CKD-EPI
creatinine equation. An alternative creatinine-based GFR
estimating equation is acceptable if it has been shown to
improve accuracy of GFR estimates compared to the 2009
CKD-EPI creatinine equation. ” We are updating this recom-
mendation to accommodate the availability of alternative
equations that also have high levels of accuracy. Since the
publication of the KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline
for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Dis-
ease
1 for GFR estimation in adults, there have been 3 main
sources of validated equations: those developed by the
CKD-EPI, those developed by EKFC, and modi ﬁcations of
each for use in speci ﬁc regions ( Table 14
83,91,147,148,235,238–
243). Table 15 lists thresholds for key performance metrics
that can be used to guide comparison between equations.
The CKD-EPI Research Group developed equations for
estimating GFR from creatinine, cystatin C, and the combination
of both, with and without inclusion of a coef ﬁcient for Black
race. The concerns about the continued use of race in GFR that
led to the removal of the race coef ﬁcient are described in the
rationale that follows Practice Point 1.2.4.2. The 2009 CKD-EPI
creatinine equation includes creatinine, age, race, and sex.
238 The
2021 CKD-EPI creatinine equation was reﬁtted without race and
includes creatinine, age, and sex. 147 As a consequence of not
including the Black race coef ﬁcient, the 2021 CKD-EPI
creatinine equation leads to a small overestimate of GFR in
non-Black individuals and a small underestimate in Black
individuals. The 2009 CKD-EPI creatinine equation is more
accurate than the 2021 CKD-EPI creatinine equation in the
non-Black race group, as indicated by the percentage of eGFRs
within 30% of mGFR (P
30), although the change in the level of
accuracy is small compared with the known variability in
mGFR and eGFR, and P
30 remains at the level consistent with
recommended targets as indicated in prior CKD guidelines
(Table 1483,91,147,148,235,238–243 Section 1.2.2, Figure 12 174).1,147
The 2021 CKD-EPI eGFR creatinine-cystatin C equation that
includes both ﬁltration markers but does not include a term
for Black race leads to improved accuracy in both race groups,
with less difference between race groups in all metrics. The
EKFC developed equations for estimating GFR from creatinine
and cystatin C.
91,240 Before implementation in other regions,
the authors recommended that local regions specify
population-speciﬁc Q-values for the creatinine-based EKFC
equation, which is the normal level of creatinine in that region.
T o make the SCr-based EKFC equation applicable for children,
age-adjusted Q-values were de ﬁned. The original EKFC
creatinine equation had a Q-value developed from Belgium
and Sweden but was validated in 7 European studies and is
recommended for use in White Europeans.
240 They have
recently published Q-values for Black Europeans developed
from a cohort of 90 kidney donors in Paris and for Black
Africans developed from 2 cohorts in République
Démocratique de Congo Cote D ’Ivoire. The EKFC cystatin C
equation includes only age and cystatin C, that is, it does not
include sex or race. The Q-value for cystatin C was developed
in a White cohort in Uppsala, Sweden. The cystatin C –based
EKFC equation has been validated in White Europeans, Black
Europeans, White Americans, and Black Africans. T o increase
accuracy and precision, EKFC recommends averaging
creatinine and cystatin C to obtain an estimate of GFR that
includes both ﬁltration markers. eGFRcr-cys (the average of
the EKFC creatinine and EKFC cystatin C) also provides the
most accurate estimates, consistent with the ﬁndings of CKD-
EPI eGFRcr-cys.
In both the CKD-EPI and EKFC external validation data-
sets, there are consistent ﬁndings that the eGFRcr-cys provides
improved performance in estimating mGFR compared with
the respective creatinine- or cystatin-only equations. This re-
inforces the recommendation in Section 1.2.1 emphasizing the
greater use of eGFRcr-cys for decisions that require GFR.
There have been several modi ﬁcations to the CKD-EPI
equations for use in individual countries, including China, Japan,
and Pakistan.
83,153,235 We expect country-speciﬁcm o d iﬁcations
of both CKD-EPI and EKFC to continue to be developed. One
recent study in China reported no clinically meaningful
difference in the performance of the Asian-modi ﬁed CKD-EPI
and EKFC equations compared with mGFR.244
Studies vary in their consistency and precision. Direct
comparisons of available estimating equations in populations
with worldwide applicability are lacking, and so too are
validation studies comparing equations against mGFR in all
populations of interest. The overall certainty of the evidence is
therefore low but where the performance characteristics of
GFR estimating equations in the population of interest are
known, there are data to support the use of one equation over
another for improved accuracy of GFR reporting.
Practice Point 1.2.4.2: Use of race in the computation of
eGFR should be avoided.
Estimating equations for GFR have historically incorpo-
rated demographic variables of age, sex, and race to explain
variation in serum concentrations of endogenous ﬁltration
markers that are unrelated to GFR, thereby minimizing sys-
tematic errors in subgroups de ﬁned by these variables and
systematic differences between groups.
Age, sex, and race variables were included in the 2009
CKD-EPI equation as previous studies indicated higher
average SCr for the same mGFR level in people who are older
versus younger, males versus females, and people who are
Black versus non-Black. Incorporation of these variables
minimized systematic errors in groups and systematic dif-
ferences between groups.
147,245 Similarly, subsequent to the
chapter 1 www.kidney-international.org
S188 Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 4S), S117–S314
--- PAGE 74 ---
Table 14 | Validated GFR estimating equations
Marker
Equation name and
year Age Variables Development populations
Creatinine CKD-EPI 2009 238 $18; modi ﬁcation
CKD-EPI 40 for
pediatric available
Developed using A, S, R but
reported not using the Black
race coef ﬁcient, A, S, R (NB)
8254 Black and NB individuals from 10 studies
in the United States and Europe
a
CKiD U25 2021 239 1–25 A, S, height 928 children with CKD in the United States and
Canada
CKD-EPI 2021 147 $18 A, S 8254 Black and NB individuals from 10 studies
in the United States and Europe a
EKFC 2021 240 2–100 A, S, European Black and NB
speciﬁc Q-value; separate
Q-values for Africa vs. Europe
mGFR vs. SCr (11,251 participants in 7 studies
in Europe and 1 study from the United States)
Normal GFR from 5482 participants in 12 studies
of kidney donor candidates (100% Caucasian)
European NB Q from 83,157 laboratory samples
(age 2–40 years) in 3 European hospital clinical
laboratories; European Black Q-value (N ¼ 90
living kidney donors from Paris); African Black
Q-value (N ¼ 470 healthy individuals from
République Démocratique de Congo); All
Q-values developed in cohorts independent
for EKFC development and validation
Lund Malmö Revised
2014
241
A, S 3495 GFR examinations from 2847 adults from
Sweden referred for measurement of GFR
CKD-EPI 2009
Modiﬁed for
China 2014 b,242
$18 A, S 589 people with diabetes from the Third Af ﬁliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, China
CKD-EPI 2009
Modiﬁed for
Japan 2016 b,83
$18 A, S 413 hospitalized Japanese people in 80 medical
centers
CKD-EPI 2009
Modiﬁed for
Pakistan 2013 b,235
$18 A, S 542 randomly selected low- to middle-income
communities in Karachi and 39 people from
the kidney clinic
Cystatin C CKD-EPI 2012 148 $18 A, S 5352 Black and NB individuals from 13 studies
in the United States and Europe
EKFC 2023 91 18–100 A mGFR vs. SCys (assumed to be the same as
mGFR vs. SCr)
Normal GFR (same as for the SCr equation)
Q from laboratory samples from 227,643 (42%
female) laboratory samples from Uppsala
University Hospital, Sweden
CAPA 2014
243 A, S 4690 individuals within large subpopulations of
children and Asian and Caucasian adults
Creatinine-
cystatin C
CKD-EPI 2012 148 $18 Developed using A, S, R but
reported not using the Black
race coef ﬁcient, A, S, R (NB)
5352 Black and NB individuals from 13 studies
in the United States and Europe
CKD-EPI 2021
147 $18 A, S 5352 Black and NB individuals from 13 studies in
the United States and Europe
Average of EKFC cr
and cys 240
$2 A, S, European race speci ﬁc
Q-value; separate Q-values
for Africa vs. Europe
See above for EKFC creatinine and cystatin C
A, age; CAPA, Caucasian and Asian pediatric and adult subjects; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CKD-EPI, Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration; CKiD, chronic
kidney disease in children; cr, creatinine; cys, cystatin C; EKFC, European Kidney Function Consortium; GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate; mGFR, measured glomerular ﬁltration
rate; NB, non-Black; Q values, median level of serum creatinine or cystatin C in a given population without chronic kidney disease; R, race; S, sex; SCr, serum creatinine; SCys,
serum cystatin C; U25, under 25 years old.
aAlso included 100 Asians and 353 Hispanic or Native Americans.
bModiﬁed from CKD-EPI or MDRD; modi ﬁcations may re ﬂect systematic differences in measurement of creatinine and mGFR as well as population differences in non-GFR
determinants of creatinine.
www.kidney-international.org chapter 1
Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 4S), S117–S314 S189
--- PAGE 75 ---
initial publication, the EKFC equation also included as
separate Q-values, the median SCr concentration for Black
Europeans from Paris and Africans from Cote D ’Ivoire and
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
91
Race differs from age and sex, as race (and ethnicity) is dy-
namic, shaped by geographic, cultural, and sociopolitical forces,
and thus the de ﬁnition can change across geography and over
time.
246,247 Consistent with this, in the past several years,
inclusion of race in GFR estimating equations, along with
other algorithms in medicine, faced increasing scrutiny,
particularly in the United States but also elsewhere in the
world.
248–254 Concerns included, ﬁrst, race is a social and not a
biological construct, and thus the de ﬁnition of a race group is
subject to change over time. Second, using a binary variable to
assign race groups ignores social and biological diversity within
and among people with similar racial background groups.
Third, there are differences across countries and regions in
self-reported race and ethnicity, thus leading to uncertainty as
to how to apply the term, and blanket use can lead to error.
Thus, even though the inclusion of an indicator for race
group leads to improved accuracy compared with mGFR in
some studies, these concerns and other considerations led to the
2021 recommendation for it not to be used in the computation
of eGFR in the United States.
255 Other countries have also
recognized that race should not be included in computation
and elected to use the CKD-EPI 2009 age, sex, race –non-
Black, as the population of people who are Black was
sufﬁciently small to not warrant error for other groups.
236,256
W e recognize that speci ﬁc countries or regions (e.g., Japan
and Thailand) have developed “region-speciﬁc” equations.153
W e advocate for modifying equations based on the population
being tested.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations.
Practice Point 1.2.4.3: Estimate GFR in children using
validated equations that have been developed or validated
in comparable populations.
Examples of validated equations include the CKiD under 25
years old (U25) 2021 eGFRcr equation, the EKFC, and the
CKD-EPI40. The W ork Group judged that many healthcare
providers would choose the CKiD U25 2021 eGFRcr equation
given it was derived in a multiracial cohort of children with
CKD and has been externally validated in cohorts with reduced
and normal GFR. The performance of the CKiD U25 2021
eGFRcr equation is uncertain in the very young, those with very
low GFR, or in populations outside of Europe and North
America.
257 An alternative height/sex/age/creatinine-based
GFR estimating equation is acceptable if it has been shown to
improve accuracy of GFR estimates in the population of
interest ( Table 14
83,91,147,148,235,238–243). The EKFC equation
has been validated in a large cohort of European children (N
¼ 1254), as well as in adults. 240 Of interest, the EKFC
equation in children is the same as in adults. Thus, both
CKiD U25 and EKFC allow a GFR estimation for children
with CKD without changes in calculated eGFR at the
transition between adolescence and young adulthood. In
children with neurological disorders, muscle wasting, or who
have metabolic disorders and are on a very low –protein diet,
a cystatin C –based equation is likely more appropriate.
1.3 Evaluation of albuminuria
Albuminuria refers to abnormal loss of albumin in the urine
(urine ACR $30 mg/g or $3 mg/mmol). Albumin is one type
of plasma protein found in the urine in normal subjects and
in larger quantity in people with kidney disease. In the KDIGO
2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease,
1 clinical terminology
was changed to focus on albuminuria rather than proteinuria
as albumin is the principal component of urinary protein in
most kidney diseases. Epidemiologic data demonstrate a strong
relationship between the quantity of urine albumin with both
kidney and CVD risk and observed CVD even at very low
levels, and assays to measure albumin are more precise and
sensitive than assays to measure urine protein. W e refer to
albuminuria or urine albumin when discussing general
concepts and will refer either to total protein, albumin, or other
speciﬁc proteins when discussing that parameter speciﬁcally.
1.3.1 Guidance for physicians and other healthcare providers
Practice Point 1.3.1.1: Use the following measurements for
initial testing of albuminuria (in descending order of prefer-
ence). In all cases, a ﬁrst void in the morning midstream
sample is preferred in adults and children.
(i) urine ACR, or
(ii) reagent strip urinalysis for albumin and ACR with
automated reading.
If measuring urine protein, use the following measurements:
(i) urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (PCR),
(ii) reagent strip urinalysis for total protein with auto-
mated reading, or
(iii) reagent strip urinalysis for total protein with
manual reading.
Table 15 | Criteria for equation comparison for comparison of
candidate equations to another (i.e., how to determine
validity)
Criteria Consideration
Systematic error (bias): absolute magnitude
of the absolute value of the median
difference ¼ median (eGFR – mGFR)
Small <5
Moderate 5 –10
Large >10
Precision: IQR of the difference between
eGFR and mGFR
Small <10
Moderate 10 –20
Large >20
Accuracy: P 30 (percentage of estimates
within 30% of mGFR)
Optimal $90
Acceptable 80 –90
Poor <80
eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; IQR, interquartile range; mGFR, measured
glomerular ﬁltration rate.
Units for systematic error (bias) and IQR are ml/min per 1.73 m 2 and for units for P 30
are percentages. Equations that have large error (bias) or IQR, or low P 30 have poor
performance.
chapter 1 www.kidney-international.org
S190 Kidney International (2024) 105 (Suppl 4S), S117–S314
